# 12/5/22

Most of tonight's discussion centered around the extra credit problems set
([ps5][1]), which focuses on basic elliptic curve mechanics.

Some students were wondering about resources for understanding elliptic curve
concepts. There's a [section of the class resources document][2] with a few
pointers. In addition to the first two links there (which both provide
visualizations, the first with classic elliptic curves over the reals and the
second with discrete curves over a prime-ordered field), [this blog post][3] is
also pretty good for building visual intuition. The wikipedia links in the
resources doc are good for a slightly more formal treatment.

Much of the rest of the conversation centered around the point multiplication
problem in ps5. Wikipedia gives a few potential impelmentations for the
"double-and-add" approach, which is recommended in the ps5 docstring prompt.
The one we spent the most time discussing was wikipedia's recursive approach:

```
  f(P, d) is
     if d = 0 then
         return 0                         # computation complete
     else if d = 1 then
         return P
     else if d mod 2 = 1 then
         return point_add(P, f(P, d - 1)) # addition when d is odd
     else
         return f(point_double(P), d/2)   # doubling when d is even
```

Here, `P` is the point and `d` is the scalar multiplicand. The wikipedia
pseudocode parameter `P` is analogous to `x` and `y` in [the pset function
definition][4], and `d` is analogous to `n` in same. If we were to rewrite the
pseudocode function definition in python, it would look like:

```python
class Point:
    """
    NOTE: you're given something like this in the pset https://github.com/cs-gy6903/2022-fall/blob/master/ps5/ps5.py#L11
    """
    x: int
    y: int

def f(P: Point, d: int) -> Point:
    """ TODO """
```

Gradescope will evaluate you on negative scalar inputs, so that's a case you
need to handle. Note that the wikipedia recursive algorithm doesn't handle
negative scalars well. If it is given a negative scalar, the recursive calls
will either make the scalar _more_ negative in the odd scalar (point addition)
case or simply divide by 2 in the even scalar (doubling) case. For the odd
scalar case, subtracting 1 from a negative number simply makes that number more
negative. For the even scalar case, dividing by two will halve the negative
scalar. This works great for a while (halving a negative number will bring it
closer to 0), but will hit a point of infinite recursion when:

1. `d = -1`. At that point, it will hit the odd/point_add case, where `d` will
   become:
2. `d = -2`, where it will then hit the even/point_double case, where `d` will
   become:
3. `-2/2 = -1`, and then BOOM. you're right back to `d = -1`, top of the list,
   infinite recursion, blown-out call stack.

So, you need to handle the negative case yourself. One way to do that might be
to simply negate the result of the recursive call to the multiplicaiton
function called on the same point and the absolute value of the scalar. Amended
pseudo-code might look something like this:

```
  f(P, d) is
     if d = 0 then
         return 0                         # computation complete
     else if d = 1 then
         return P
     else if d < 0 then                   # <-- EDIT
         return negate(f(P, abs(d)))      # <-- EDIT
     else if d mod 2 = 1 then
         return point_add(P, f(P, d - 1)) # addition when d is odd
     else
         return f(point_double(P), d/2)   # doubling when d is even
```

Lastly, we also touched on the difference between PRP's and PRF's. I pointed to
a [brief writeup from OH notes a few weeks ago][5]. We also discussed what the
role of GCM is w/r/t AES. GCM is a [mode of block cipher operation][6], but is
different from the modes covered in [ps4][7] in that it is a form of
[authenticated encryption][8]. This means that it provides integrity guarantees
that [malleable][9] modes such as ECB, CBC, and (vanilla) CTR do not -- in
malleable modes there is no in-band way for decryptors to detect whether a
cipehrtext has been tampered with in transit (unless some other MAC scheme is
used in addition).

There was also some brief discussion about the job/role of various components
of secure channel establishment (e.g. TLS 1.3 handshake). ECDHE is used for key
agreement, but does not provide any authentication guarantees. Certificates are
used for handshake authentication. AES GCM is used for confidentiality and
integrity.

[1]: https://github.com/cs-gy6903/2022-fall/tree/master/ps5
[2]: https://github.com/cs-gy6903/resources#elliptic-curves
[3]: https://andrea.corbellini.name/2015/05/17/elliptic-curve-cryptography-a-gentle-introduction
[4]: https://github.com/cs-gy6903/2022-fall/blob/master/ps5/ps5.py#L100
[5]: https://github.com/cs-gy6903/2022-fall/blob/master/office-hours/will_2022-09-26.md#prp-vs-prf
[6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_cipher_mode_of_operation
[7]: https://github.com/cs-gy6903/2022-fall/tree/master/ps4
[8]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Authenticated_encryption
[9]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malleability_(cryptography)
